---
title: "Looking at Model Theoretic Techniques, part 1"
date: 2023-05-02
---
In the past few weeks, I have spent quite some time reading David Marker's _Model Theory: An Introduction_.
Here I'll write about what it is and what I've been doing. 

## What is Model Theory?

Model theory is a branch of **mathematical logic** centered around models.
A **model** is a structure that (aptly put) models how some theory behaves.
This is a good general heuristic for what models are, but how do they do it?
To answer this, we will explore some of the basic technical details involved.

# Languages

A language is a collection of functions, relations, and constants. 
This is a fairly abstract way of framing something you call a "language", 
so let's come up with an example!

# The integers!

The integers $$ \mathbb{Z} $$ are the numbers $$ \{ 0, 1, -1, 2, -2,...\} $$.
Now let's describe some familiar ideas:
1) we can add and multiply any two integers together and the result is an integer. 
2) we can compare any two integers and obtain a `true` or `false` result.
3) there are certain integers that are particularly important.

Idea 1: This intuitive notion corresponds to defining the following functions:
$$ +(x,y)=x+y $$ and $$*(x,y) = x*y$$. What this means is we take two arbitrary elements in $$ \mathbb{Z} $$ 
and join them together into a single element of $$ \mathbb{Z} $$.
For this reason we say that these functions map an ordered pair to a single element and write their behavior this:
$$ +:Z\times Z \to Z $$ and $$ *:Z\times Z \to Z $$

Idea 2: This intuitive notion should remind us of statements like $$2<3$$, $$2=3$$ and so on.
The first statement is `true` but the second statement is `false`. The key idea with relations 
is that for some relation, there is a particular set of elements $$ y $$ that satisfy the condition
$$ R(2,y) $$ for instance ($$ 2 $$ is related to $$ y $$). Comparing $$2$$ and $$y$$ under
the relation $$<$$ gives us all the integers $$y$$ that $$2$$ is less than (equivalently, $$y $$ that are greater than $$2$$).

Idea 3: There is one integer more important than any other. 
That integer is $$ 0 $$. An important fact is the following: 
for any integer $$ x $$, there is an integer $$ y $$ such that $$ x+y = 0 $$.
That integer is known as the **additive inverse** and is more commonly represented by $$ -x$$.
If some number is particularly important to us, we may want to include it in our language. 

So now that we broke the integers down, a possible language for the integers could be $$ \mathcal{L} = \{0,+,=\} $$.
This is just one possible language of many! We choose this one as it has one of each type of symbol. 

# What do Models have to do with it?

Well, a model (or a __structure__ as market calls it) is a tuple (like a pair but with arbitrary dimensions)
consisting of a universe (the set of elements we're doing things with) and **interpretations** of all function, relation, and constant symbols.
Why do we distinguish the symbols and the interpretations? 
The symbols don't mean anything on their own. 
It's only by interpreting the symbols through the model we create that we assign them the usual meaning. 
For instance, $$ +:(x,y) =x+y $$ doesn't let us do anything, these are just symbols.
But if we wrote the same statement $$ x+y $$ in our model of the integers, then the function
would be interpreted as integer addition as described above. 

# Basic notions in Mathematical Logic

Before we proceed any further, it is necessary to specify what kind of statements are representable by models.
We will do this by introducing several notions from mathematical logic.

## Terms and Formulae

A **term** is in essence some mathematical object. 
In an analogy to language, a term is a noun or noun phrase.
What counts as a term?
1) every constant symbol in our language can be a term
2) every variable symbol in our language can be a term.
3) applying a function to a set of terms results in another term. 
A **formula** is in essence some mathematical fact.
In the same analogy, a formula is a sentence of which the term is a component. 
More complicated formulae are built up from atomic formulae. 
What counts as an atomic formula?
1) $$ t_1 = t_2 $$
2) $$ R(t_1,...,t_n) $$

## Quantifiers

There are two quantifiers in the standard first-order logic: these are $$ \exists $$ and $$ \forall $$.
$$\exists $$ means that there is at least one instance of some variable $$ x $$ making the formula $$ \varphi(x) $$ true 
Likewise, $$ \forall $$ means that every single instance of $$ x$$ makes the formula $$ \varphi(x) $$ true. 
(Note: in both cases $$ x$$ is taken to be an element of some background set.)
If a variable in a sentence is attached to a quantifier, then it is called a **bound variable**.
A variable that is not bound is a **free variable**.
Finally:
A **sentence** is a formula with no free variables.
Because sentences lack free variables, they are either true or false. 
This cannot be said for every formula; there is no single way of assigning a formula some truth value.

# What was this for?

We will now reveal the payoff for building up all of the matehmatical logic jargon above.
A **theory** is a set of sentences.
If some model models a theory, we write $$ M \models T $$. 
The payoff is that we can define models so that we capture the behavior of a theory 
but not have to work directly within it. 

# Closing remarks

This barely scratches the surface of what Model Theory is (and further, does not go into the same level of depth as most other posts on this blog will). 
I hope that this provides some value to the reader.

Take care!

Published 2023-05-03.
First published 2023-05-02.
Current file is Revision 2.
